# DATA ANALYTICS
# BASICS OF DATA

# WEEK 1 
Data Analytics

Responsibilities and Roles:
1. Data collection and preparation
2. Data analysis
3. Data visualization and storytelling
4. Decision support
5. Collaboration and communication
6. Continous learning and adaptation

This helps an organization make informed decisions and improve operations, drive strategies and create competitive advantage.
Must understand how to aqcuire, clean and transform data to meet organization's needs.
Create powerful visualizations to display the collected and analyzed data to decision-makers, stakeholders.

Analytics is made possible by modern DATA, STORAGE and COMPUTING capabilities, the three pillars.
- There is a huge amount of data in the world.
- The cost of storage has dropped drastically over time, making storage easily available/affordable
- Continous advancement in computing power has benefited analytics. Supercomputers needed for analytics use to be expensive and a scarce resource. Now there is enough computing power on a single laptop to perform analytics tasks.
These three trends—the massive volume of data generated by our businesses on a daily basis, the availability of inexpensive storage to retain that data, and the cloud's promise of virtually infinite computing power—come together to create fertile ground for data analytics.

Analytics Process:
1. Data Acquisition
2. Cleaning and manipulation
3. Analysis
4. Visualization
5. Reporting and Communication
- The process is iterative, a set of interrelated actions that may be revisited frequently while working with a dataset. Like noticing unusual data points in a dataset and having to go back to cleaning the data and rerun analysis with the newly cleaned data, and having to return to data acqusition stage as well.

Analysis Techniques:
1. Descriptive
2. Predictive
3. Prescriptive

ML, AI and Deep Learning

Machine Learning: Uses algorithms to discover knowledge in datasets that can be applied to make informed decisions about the future. Useful in the following:

- Segmenting customers and determining the marketing messages that will appeal to different customer groups.
- Discovering anomalies in system and application logs that may be indicative of a cybersecurity incident.
- Forecasting product sales based on market and environmental conditions.
- Recommending the next movie that a customer might wish to watch based on their past activity and the preferences of similar customers.
- Setting prices for hotel rooms far in advance based on forecasted demand

Artificial Intelligence 
- Techniques used to get a computer to imitate human behavior, to try and behave as if they are intelligent.

Machine Learning 
- Is also a subset of AI techniques, attempting to apply statistics to data problems in an effort to discover new knowledge. It is AI techniques designed to learn.

Deep Learning
- Is a further subdivision of ML that uses complex techniques, known as neural networks, to discover knowledge in a particular way. It is a highly specialized field of ML, mostly used for image, video and sound analysis

Data Governance
- Ensures that an organization has high-quality data and is able to effectively control that data. Using Master Data Management programs to maintain and improve the quality of the data.

Analytics Tool
- Automate much of the heavy workload of analysis, improving the analyst's ability to acquire, clean, manipulate, visualizer and analyze data. As well as assistance in reporting and communicating results. Examples of these tools are Excel spreadsheet, Google sheets.

DATA TYPES
- A data element is an attribute about a person, place, or thing containing data within a range of values. Data elements also describe characteristics of activities, including orders, transactions, and events.

A data type limits the values a data element can have
- Individual data types support structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data

Tabular Data
- Tabular data is data organized into a table, made up of columns and rows. A table represents information about a single topic. Each column represents a uniquely named field within a table, also called a variable, about a single characteristic.
- The contents of each column contain values for the data element as defined by the column header.
- It is helpful to think of tabular data as rectangular data. It is easy to draw a rectangle around the data. The top of the rectangle is defined by columns, while rows define the left side of the rectangle.
- Spreadsheets, including Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets, and Apple Numbers, are practical tools for representing tabular data. A relational database management system (RDMS), commonly called a database, extends the tabular model. Instead of having all data in a single table, a database organizes related data across multiple tables. The connection between tables is known as a relationship. Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, and PostgreSQL are examples of database software. Tabular data is the concept that underpins both spreadsheets and relational databases.

STRUCTURED Data Types
- Structured data is tabular in nature and organized into rows and columns. Think of a spreadsheet for example. With clearly defined column headings, spreadsheets are easy to work with and understand.

Character
- Limits data entry to only valid characters.
- Characters can include the alphabet that you might see on your keyboard, as well as numbers.
- Depending on your needs, multiple data types are available that can enforce character limits.

Alphanumeric 
- Most widely used data type for storing character-based data.
- As the name implies, alphanumeric is appropriate when a data element consists of both numbers and letters.
- The alphanumeric data type is ideal for storing product stock-keeping units (SKUs). It is common in the retail clothing space to have a unique SKU for each item available for sale. If you sell jeans, you may stock products from Armani Jeans, Diesel, Lee Jeans, Levi's, and Wrangler. To keep track of all the manufacturer, size, color, and fit combinations in your inventory. Tracking inventory at the SKU level allows you to manage availability in your online and in-store systems, all courtesy of the alphanumeric data type.

Text
- There are times when it is necessary to impose even stricter limits on character-related data to exclude numbers. Excluding numbers can be achieved using the text data type.
- Closely related to the alphanumeric data type, but more stringent. It is helpful to think of text as a subset of alphanumeric, only allowing the storage of alphabetic characters.
- Improves the overall data quality. For example, consider the “State” data element in Figure 2.1. If the system contains state names from the United States, it would be appropriate to select a text data type.

- Consider a data entry example. Suppose you operate an online retail system. To deliver orders, you need address information for the intended recipients. This information comes from the customers themselves since they can specify where orders should be shipped. Any time a person interacts with a computer, there is the potential for a data entry error. Suppose someone wanted to enter “Montana” for the state component of their address.

Take a look at the positioning of the O and 0 keys in Figure 2.3, depicting the U.S. QWERTY keyboard layout. These two keys are very close together. Many people press these keys with the fourth finger of their right hand, making a data entry error that much more likely. A person could supply the value “M0ntana” instead of the intended “Montana.” With “State” as a text data type, trying to input the erroneous value would result in an error. However, with “State” implemented as alphanumeric, nothing would prevent that mistake from making its way into the database.

Each database software has its unique method of implementing character data types to handle the nuances related to character data. The most significant difference has to do with how much data a particular data element can contain. Table 2.2(LMS) shows a sampling of how the three most popular databases provide data types for character data.

All of the data types shown in Table 2.2(LMS) support alphanumeric data. Where they differ is in how much data they can handle. 
- Before defining a column as alphanumeric, you need to determine how long your longest-possible text value will be.
- You also need to realize that while data types may have the same names, they are implemented differently by software vendors. There are also individual data types, like CLOB and LONGTEXT, that are vendor-specific.
- Finally, you need to be aware of the absolute limits imposed by the database you are using.

- With spreadsheets, configuring a given cell or range of cells as a text-only data type takes more effort than when using a database. It is not possible to accomplish this with one of the native data types provided by the software. Instead, limiting it to just text requires a formula. Suppose a person tries to input a value containing numbers or symbols into a cell where the formula is active. 

Character Sets
- When considering alphanumeric and text data types, you need to think about the character set you are using to input and store data when using a database. Databases use character sets to map, or encode, data and store it digitally. The ASCII encoding standard is based on the U.S. English alphabet. ASCII accommodates both the upper and lowercase English alphabet and numbers, mathematical operators, and symbols.
- Many languages include accent marks, extending the Latin alphabet. For example, Akrapovič is a Slovenian manufacturer. To store the č in Akrapovič, you need to encode that value appropriately. In addition, there are many languages, including Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean, which use symbols as opposed to extending the Latin alphabet. For example, the Arabic word for “cat.” Several encoding standards exist that accommodate non-Latin characters. One of the most common is Unicode Transformation Format-8 (UTF-8), which allows non-Latin characters to be input by a user and stored in a file or database.
- It is necessary to realize that individual characters may consume multiple bytes, impacting the length of a character string you can store in a character data type.

Numeric
- Exclusively numbers making up the values of a data attribute, integer and numeric data types used in databases
  
Whole Numbers
- Integer and all its subtypes are for storing whole numbers. Value ranges for smallint and shortinteger are the same. Same for int and integer, as well as bigint and longinteger. different names, but same functionality.
  
Rational Numbers??? (LMS EXPLANATION NOT ENOUGH)
- In all its variants, the numeric data type is for rational numbers that include a decimal point.
- Each DB vendor has different implementation on how they support rational numbers.
- There is a data type called numeric in both SQL Server and MySQL that is functionally equivalent to the decimal type.
- Data types are incosistently named across databases, you must consider the ultimate range of values a given data element handles.
  
Date and Time
- DBs have various data types for handling date- and time related info, depending on the data you need to store pertaining to time, date or both.
  
Currency
- To display the stored value as a currency you must apply data formatting so it displays as required for the specific purpose. Data formatting is common with currency and dates data types.
- Microsoft SQL Server DB has data types specifically for storing currency.
- It is better to use numeric data type to store currency related data, to avoid rounding errors. Limiting a calculation to four digits of precision after the deicmal point can lead to rounding errors.

You should recognize the difference between storing a data type and formatting it to facilitate human interpretation. Take care not to automatically infer a data type based on formatting.

Strong And Weak Typing
Data types define values placed in columns. 
- Strong typing is when technology rigidly enforces data types. Databases, discussed in Chapter 3, use strong typing. A database column defined as numeric only accepts numerical values. You will get an error if you attempt to enter characters into a numeric column.
- Weak typing loosely enforces data types. Spreadsheets use weak typing to help make it easier for people to accomplish their work. Spreadsheets default to an “automatic” data type and accommodate practically any value. When a person specifies a data type, it is loosely enforced compared to a database. For example, with a numeric spreadsheet cell, the software does not stop you from entering and storing characters.

UNSTRUCTURED Data Types
- Any data that does not fit neatly into the tabular model. Ex: Digital images, Audio, Video, Open-ended survey responses.
- Analyzing unstructured data gives a lot of insight and useful information, better understanding.

Binary
- Common for storing unstructured data, supports any type of file.
- When choosing which binary type to use, size tends to be the limoiting factor. You must select data type that is as large as the largest file you plan to store.
- Most common types of unstructured data are audio, image and video data.
- Spreadsheets are designed to manage highly structured data, but are not good at storing binary data, which is unstructured. Google sheets does allow storing of binary data within a cell, excel is not good at it.
- DBs are better equiped and sophisticated enough to handle a collection of data types for storing binary data.

Audio
- Recording/Capturing, (digitizing ), storing, and analyzing audio data leads to better decision-making and responsiveness in the real world.
- Audio in its raw form takes up more storage space, its better encode it with a compression algoritm to reduce the space it uses.
- Storing audio requires a data type designed to handle raw binary data.
- Quality of the audio affects the file size, hence more storage required.

Images
- AI alogorithms for image processing over a set of digital photos allow us to be able search and find specific objects in an image, or an image containing that object. Used for X-rays, Insurance.
- Image Resolution is an important factor, that governs the size of the image file and how much space is required to store it. Images of higher quality, more detail and greater resolution will need more storage space.
- Images can also be compressed to take up less space.
- Storing in a DB needs a data type designed to handle raw binary data, like varbinary or BLOB.

Video
- Image processing algorithms are also applied on videos..
- Resolution, Length/Duration of the video also affect the size of the file and storage

Large Text
- Their data type names differ among DB vendors
- Oracle has varchar/varchar2 text data type, that is limited to 4000 bytes. But has the CLOB proprietary data type, which supports up to 128TB of text data.
- Microsoft implements varchar differently, supporting up to 2GB

CATEGORIES OF DATA
